docs/getting-started.md, before:

# Getting Started with Sand.js

Welcome to the Getting Started guide! This guide assumes you have already installed [Node.js](https://nodejs.org).

# What is Sand?

Sand is a lightweight, all-purpose Javascript application framework. Sand provides a simple, yet robust, application lifecycle and many pluggable clients and libraries.

Lifecycle features include:

#### Initialization/Start/Shutdown hooks
Execute custom code before the app starts, when the app starts, and when the app shuts down.

#### Automatic config loading by environment
When Sand initializes all its plugins, each plugin will automatically load its proper configuration based on the application execution environment specified in `process.env.NODE_ENV`. Some common plugins include MySQL, Memcache, ElasticSearch, etc. If your app doesn't use execution environments, don't worry! There's a default config section for that.

#### Unique Execution Context
Sand provides a generic, unique "per request" execution context for any job. "per request" may be understood in the same way as a typical web application request that has it's own execution environment.

#### Simple, Robust Plugin system
Sand provides a simple Plugin API. All plugins are called `Grains`. A grain provides a simple API of `init`, `start`, and `shutdown` which the main Sand application invokes at the appropriate lifecycle point.

# Web Applications

One of Sand's strongest features is it's fully featured, all-purpose Web Application Server provided in [sand-http](https://github.com/SandJS/http).

Sand [HTTP](https://github.com/SandJS/http) provides:

- Regular Expression based routing
- Request Middleware à la [Express.js](http://expressjs.com/)
- MVC support
- Model querying (M from MVC) with Sand [MySQL](https://github.com/SandJS/mysql). MySQL is the most commonly used Model library, but any ORM can be adapted to be used in Sand with Sand's easy plugin system.
- View Rendering (V from MVC) with the template language of your choice ([EJS](https://github.com/tj/ejs), [Jade/Pug](http://jade-lang.com/), etc.)
- Route mappings to Controller/Actions (C from MVC)
- Any ORM may be made pluggable using Sand's plugin system. 

# The simplest Sand application

You can create **ANY** kind of Node.js application, script, or service using Sand.

The simplest Sand application is shown below.

```JavaScript
let Sand = require('sand');
let app = new Sand();
app.start(function () {
  console.log('Hello, World!');
});
```

The `require('sand')` loads the Sand Application class. 

To create a new application, simply instantiate the Sand Application class.

Only one instance of a Sand application is allowed. When the Application has been instantiated, the `global.sand` variable will be set with that instance. All modules and application files will be able to reference the main application instance by `global.sand` or just `sand`.

Passing a callback to `Sand#start()` will ensure that the code in your callback gets executed _after_ the application has started.

# Sand Grains

A Sand "grain" is a plugin for the Sand.js Application. 

## How grains work

- A grain is a node module that exports a class extending `SandGrain` found in the [sand-grain](https://github.com/pocketly/sand-grain) module. 
- The class implements member functions `init`, `start`, and `shutdown` which are invoked by the Sand Application during its lifecycle. These hooks load and dispose of any resources that the plugin provides to the application.
- In the `init()` hook, the grain loads it's config and sets it on the grain instance. 
- During the `init` stage of the application, the Sand application creates a new instance of the grain, and sets it on the application instance. This means that the grain instance may be accessed from any file in the application using the syntax `sand.customGrain`.
- Every grain documents it's 
	- Configuration file name (i.e. `config/custom-grain.js`)
	- Configuration options (i.e. `{ key1: "value1", ... }`)
	- Global reference (i.e. `sand.customGrain`)
	- If a "grain" doesn't document these, then bug the "grain" developer to document them or look at the grain source.

## How to use grains

To get started, create a project directory. This directory will be used for the rest of this example.

1. Ensure that the grain is installed.
1. Create a directory named `config/`.
1. In `config/`, create a file named `custom-grain.js`.

```JavaScript
let CustomGrain = require('sand-custom-grain');
let Sand = require('sand');

let app = new Sand() // initialize the application
  .use(CustomGrain); // load the sand grain 

app.start(function () { // start the application
  console.log('Hello, World!');
});
```

The `Sand#use()` function loads a Sand Grain into the application.

# A simple HTTP Web Application

Commit message:

more on grains. and learn more

docs/getting-started.md, after:

# Getting Started with Sand.js

Welcome to the Getting Started guide! This guide assumes you have already installed [Node.js](https://nodejs.org).

# What is Sand?

Sand is a lightweight, all-purpose Javascript application framework. Sand provides a simple, yet robust, application lifecycle and many pluggable clients and libraries.

Lifecycle features include:

#### Initialization/Start/Shutdown hooks
Execute custom code before the app starts, when the app starts, and when the app shuts down.

#### Automatic config loading by environment
When Sand initializes all its plugins, each plugin will automatically load its proper configuration based on the application execution environment specified in `process.env.NODE_ENV`. Some common plugins include MySQL, Memcache, ElasticSearch, etc. If your app doesn't use execution environments, don't worry! There's a default config section for that.

#### Unique Execution Context
Sand provides a generic, unique "per request" execution context for any job. "per request" may be understood in the same way as a typical web application request that has it's own execution environment.

#### Simple, Robust Plugin system
Sand provides a simple Plugin API. All plugins are called `Grains`. A grain provides a simple API of `init`, `start`, and `shutdown` which the main Sand application invokes at the appropriate lifecycle point.

# Web Applications

One of Sand's strongest features is it's fully featured, all-purpose Web Application Server provided in [sand-http](https://github.com/SandJS/http).

Sand [HTTP](https://github.com/SandJS/http) provides:

- Regular Expression based routing
- Request Middleware à la [Express.js](http://expressjs.com/)
- MVC support
- Model querying (M from MVC) with Sand [MySQL](https://github.com/SandJS/mysql). MySQL is the most commonly used Model library, but any ORM can be adapted to be used in Sand with Sand's easy plugin system.
- View Rendering (V from MVC) with the template language of your choice ([EJS](https://github.com/tj/ejs), [Jade/Pug](http://jade-lang.com/), etc.)
- Route mappings to Controller/Actions (C from MVC)
- Any ORM may be made pluggable using Sand's plugin system. 

# The simplest Sand application

You can create **ANY** kind of Node.js application, script, or service using Sand.

The simplest Sand application is shown below.

```JavaScript
let Sand = require('sand');
let app = new Sand();
app.start(function () {
  console.log('Hello, World!');
});
```

The `require('sand')` loads the Sand Application class. 

To create a new application, simply instantiate the Sand Application class.

Only one instance of a Sand application is allowed. When the Application has been instantiated, the `global.sand` variable will be set with that instance. All modules and application files will be able to reference the main application instance by `global.sand` or just `sand`.

Passing a callback to `Sand#start()` will ensure that the code in your callback gets executed _after_ the application has started.

# Sand Grains

A Sand "grain" is a plugin for the Sand.js Application. 

## How grains work

- A grain is a node module that exports a class extending `SandGrain` found in the [sand-grain](https://github.com/pocketly/sand-grain) module. 
- The class implements member functions `init`, `start`, and `shutdown` which are invoked by the Sand Application during its lifecycle. These hooks load and dispose of any resources that the plugin provides to the application.
- In the `init()` hook, the grain loads it's config and sets it on the grain instance. 
- During the `init` stage of the application, the Sand application creates a new instance of the grain, and sets it on the application instance. This means that the grain instance may be accessed from any file in the application using the syntax `sand.customGrain`.
- Every grain documents it's 
	- Configuration file name (i.e. `config/custom-grain.js`)
	- Configuration options (i.e. `{ key1: "value1", ... }`)
	- Global reference (i.e. `sand.customGrain`)
	- If a "grain" doesn't document these, then bug the "grain" developer to document them or look at the grain source.
- Sand grains may be loaded into an application using `app.use()`. Grains may not be loaded after `app.start()` has been called.

## How to use grains

Ensure that the grain is installed.

```JavaScript
let CustomGrain = require('sand-custom-grain');
let Sand = require('sand');

let app = new Sand() // initialize the application
  .use(CustomGrain); // load the sand grain 

app.start(function () { // start the application
  console.log('Hello, World!');
  console.log(sand.customGrain); // this should output the instance of the sand grain
});
```

The `Sand#use()` function loads a Sand Grain into the application.

# Learn More

Check out the [sand-http](https://github.com/SandJS/http) readme for an example of how Sand.js web applications work.
